# genome-scale-metabolic-model-isochrysis
This repository contains data about the Genome-scale metabolic model of the Isochysis specie. The following repository will help the user to generate the complete genome-scale metabolic model from scratch guiding the user through all the steps starting from the data retrieval, data curation, and importing to the analysis of the model in the COBRA Toolbox.
using the following protocol and code users will be able to create their genome-scale metabolic model of Isochrysis sp. The code works in the MATLAB environment using the Constraint-based reconstruction and analysis (COBRA) Toolbox for generating the entire genome-scale metabolic model using the pre-organized reaction files in the COBRA format. The repository will help the user to understand the protocol for reaction curation and reconstruction of the entire model. The model can later be used for the analysis using the optFlux software to perform Flux Balance Analysis (FBA) by the constraint based approach.
After data preparation of data file, the MATLAB software was downloaded from the official website https://in.mathworks.com/matlab/download, register and create an account. After creating an account, open Matlab and log in with your account. After starting MATLAB, select applications and search for the COnstraint Based Reconstruction and Analysis (COBRA) Toolbox, install and add to the path. Now the software is ready to be used.
The Constraint-based Reconstruction and Analysis (COBRA) Toolbox is a software package in MATLAB for analyzing metabolic models. The COBRA Toolbox may be downloaded in the MATLAB environment and added to the current path in MATLAB to start working upon. COBRA Toolbox is highly used in metabolic engineering for modeling, designing, analyzing, and visualizing the metabolic model in the MATLAB environment. Initialization of the toolbox is necessary to access its various functions, including the loading of a metabolic network reconstruction which represents the biological system's metabolism. After loading the COBRA Toolbox and adding it to the current path we initialize the COBRA Toolbox using the command ‘initCobraToolbox(false)’, this command is set the true or false depending upon whether the COBRA Toolbox needs to be updated or not, by default it is false. We can now model and manipulate the network and perform optimization analysis by defining the objective function, which is a mathematical representation of the optimization goal. To simulate the metabolic network's behavior under different conditions and predict the effects of perturbations, simulation constraints are varied to represent the biological or experimental constraints that affect the overall network's behavior.
After initializing and setting up the COBRA Toolbox in the MATLAB environment, the prepared model reconstruction including unique reaction identifiers, and reaction equations along with mentioned compartments of each metabolite, reaction-associated gene(s), and compartment of the complete reaction are imported in the MATLAB. 
The reactions are imported as their unique reaction identifiers and genes are imported as grule numbers along with the list of compartments.
The reactions and genes are then combined in cell arrays named ReactionIdentifiers and gRuleList respectively. Cell arrays naming ReactionFormulas and ReactionNames are also added to add the formulas and names of the reactions respectively.
The following cell arrays were then created,
ReactionIdentifier= {‘r_0001’,’r_0002’……’biom_tot’}
ReactionNames= {‘r_0001’,’r_0002’……’biom_tot’}
ReactionFormulas= {‘r_0001’,’r_0002’……’biom_tot’}
gRuleList={grule1,grule2………grule2567’}
After adding all the data in the cell arrays, we now apply the createModel command to combine all the reactions and genes in the metabolic reconstruction. This command merges all the reactions and genes depending on the Gene-Protein-Reaction rules (GPR) rules and creates a stoichiometry of reactions to metabolites and a complete working model. ‘model=createModel(ReactionIdentifier,ReactionNames,ReactionFormulas,'grRuleList',gRuleList)’
This command creates the complete model and saves the model in the variable naming ‘model’.
Metabolic model network evaluation refers to the process of assessing the properties and performance of a metabolic network model.
After the complete uploading and designing of the draft model in MATLAB, the model needs to be refined and evaluated to improve its linkage and correctness and reduce the noise and keep only desired working reactions and pathways. For this approach, we first add the exchange reactions in the model, exchange reactions are the reactions that involve the exchange of metabolites between a cell and its environment. These reactions can be used to supply cells with nutrients that they need for growth and to remove waste products. These exchange reactions are added for all the metabolites of the model by the command ‘model1=addExchangeRxn(model1,model.mets);’ 
After adding exchange reactions to the model, the model needs to be evaluated for the presence of duplicates and blocked reactions which need to be removed from the model to enhance its working efficiency and remove noise reactions from the model. For removing the duplicate reactions from the model, we use the command, ‘modeliso=checkDuplicateRxn(model1)’. This command checks for the duplicate reactions in the model and returns the model in the variable ‘modeliso’ which has all the duplicate reactions removed from the model.
After removing the duplicate reactions, the model needs to be checked for any present blocked reactions. Blocked reactions are reactions that cannot proceed because of a lack of an enzyme, a substrate, or an intermediate metabolite. These reactions may occur due to the absence of the enzyme required for the reaction, the presence of an inhibitor, or the lack of substrate for the reaction completion. These reactions can be found using the command, ‘BlockedReaction=findBlockedReaction(modeliso)’. This command finds the blocked reactions and gives the array of blocked reactions in the variable ‘BlockedReaction’. The aim is to generate a model that yields 0 blocked reactions.
After the completion of the above processes, we vary the bounds of the ATPM reaction that here signifies the ATP maintenance reaction, here ATPM reaction is mentioned by the ‘ATP’ reaction identifier. The upper bound production of the ATPM reaction was varied from 1000 mol/s to 8.6 mol/s by the command ‘modeliso = changeRxnBounds(modeliso, 'ATP', 8.6, 'u')’, where the sequence of inputs include the name of model variable ‘modeliso’, name of reaction identifier whose bounds need to be altered, the new value of the bound, the type of bound, this type may either include ’u’ that signifies ‘upperbound’,’l’ that signifies ‘lowerbound’ or ‘b’ that signifies ‘both’ that means changes both the upperbound and the lowerbound.
After setting up the model now we need to add the objective reaction. An objective reaction is a reaction that is added to the model as a desired reaction that is to be enhanced or suppressed in a metabolic pathway purely depending on the nature and aim of the study being conducted. Objective reactions are designed based on their potential to improve the production of a desired product or to reduce the production of a waste product. In our study we aim to maximize the production of the biomass in the model hence we created the reaction with reaction identifier ‘biom_tot’ as the objective reaction using the command ‘modeliso=changeObjective(modeliso,'biom_tot')’, this command changes the reaction associated to reaction identifier ‘biom_tot’ as the objective reaction for the model in the variable ‘modeliso’. 
After the model is designed and evaluated, now the model needs to be optimized in the COBRA Toolbox to yield the flux value associated with the model and objective reaction generation. Flux refers to the rate of flow of metabolites through a metabolic pathway. Its unit is (mmol.g-1.hr-1). The overall flux of a metabolic model is determined by the activity of the enzymes involved in the pathways, as well as by the availability of substrates and the thermodynamic properties of the reactions. Flux is used to understand the activity of cells as how cells are produced, use energy, and how they respond to changes in their environment. Flux also has applications in designing metabolic pathways that are more efficient and productive.
To optimize the model being formed, we use the command ‘optimizeCbModel(modeliso)’ this command optimizes the entire model ‘modeliso’ and gives out the result of the model characteristics including biomass production rate, energy consumption rate, optimal production of a desired product, and the impact of environmental changes on metabolic fluxes using the Linear programming algorithm. 
After designing, optimizing, and finalizing the genome-scale metabolic model of the Isochrysis specie, the model which was then in COBRA format need to be converted to Systems Biology markup language (SBML) format. SBML is a standard format for representing biochemical models. This means that any software that can read SBML whether online and/or standalone can be used to analyze or simulate the model, regardless of the software that was used to create the model. Since SBML is a well-defined format for models, hence it makes the readability and interpretation easy and reliable. The convert the model into accepted SBML format, we used the command ‘writeCbModel(modeliso,'iIsochr964.xml')’. the command is used to write the COBRA format model labeled as ‘modeliso’ to ‘iIsochr964.xml’ which is the SBML format in Extensible Markup Language (XML) format. The file in the .xml format is written and readable in SBML format. 
After converting the file to SBML format, the model can be exported and used for visualization and downstream analysis purposes in the optflux software.
